Abstract
Computer Aided Detection software based on Artificial Intelligence (AI-CAD), combined with chest X-rays have recently been promoted as an easy fix for a complex problem: ending TB by 2030. WHO has recommended the use of such imaging devices in 2021 and many partnerships have helped propose benchmark analysis and technology comparisons to facilitate their “market access”.

Our aim is to examine the socio-political and health issues that stem from using AI-CAD technology in a global health context conceptualized as a set of practice and ideas organizing global intervention “in the life of others”. We also question how this technology, which is not yet fully implemented in routine use, may limit or amplify some inequalities in the care of tuberculosis. We describe AI-CAD through Actor-Network-Theory framework to understand the global assemblage and composite activities associated with detection through AI-CAD, and interrogate how the technology itself may consolidate a specific configuration of “global health”.

We explore the various dimensions of AI-CAD “health effects model”: technology design, development, regulation, institutional competition, social interaction and health cultures. On a broader level, AI-CAD represents a new version of global health's accelerationist model centered on “moving and autonomous-presumed technologies”.

We finally present key aspects in our research which help discuss the theories mobilized: AI-CAD ambivalent insertion in global health, the social lives of its data: from efficacy to markets and AI-CAD human care and maintenance it requires. We reflect on the conditions that will affect AI-CAD use and its promises. In the end, the risk of new detection technologies such as AI-CAD is indeed that the fight against TB could be reduced to one that is purely technical and technological, with neglect to its social determinants and effects.

Introduction
Computer-aided detection tools based on artificial intelligence algorithms are increasingly seen as an efficient way to detect pulmonary tuberculosis (TB), especially in resource-constrained care settings. (World Health Organization, 2021a; Codlin et al., 2021; Ahmad Khan et al., 2020; Qin et al., 2021). TB is pervasive in many low- and mid-income areas around the world. While it is largely under control in non-marginalized populations in wealthy countries, TB persists in populations at the center of contentious historical, economic, social, and political processes, including colonization (Dunn et al., 2022), exploitation (Huffman et al., 2012), extraction (Mutendi and Macdonald, 2018), incarceration (Koch, 2006), and segregation (Acevedo-Garcia, 2000).

Computer Aided Detection software based on Artificial Intelligence (AI-CAD), combined with chest X-rays have recently been promoted as an easy fix for a complex problem: ending TB by 2030 (World Health Organization, 2015). WHO has recommended the use of such imaging devices in 2021 and many partnerships have helped propose benchmark analysis and technology comparisons to facilitate their “market access” (World Health Organization, 2021b). Through its COVID-19 Response Mechanism (C19RM), the Global Fund has channeled over 4 billion $, including for AI-CAD solutions.

Our aim is also to examine the socio-political and health issues that stem from using AI-CAD technology in a global health context conceptualized as a set of practice and ideas organizing global intervention “in the life of others” (Packard, 2016). We also question how this technology, which is not yet fully implemented in routine use, may limit or amplify some inequalities and have effects on social interactions. We will describe AI-CAD network and analyze its anticipated effects drawing on Timmermans and Kaufman's framework for examining health technologies, and applying their six recommended dimensions of analysis (Table 1). By drawing focus “on how technologies act in shifting configurations of networks” (Timmermans and Kaufman, 2020), we will seek to describe through Actor-Network-Theory (ANT) framework to understand the global assemblage (Ong and Collier, 2005) and composite activities (Engel, 2020) associated with detection through AI-CAD, and interrogate how the technology itself may consolidate a specific configuration of “global health”.

This research is important for several reasons. First, because AI-CAD is at the heart of the process of digitization and datafication of health (Taylor and Broeders, 2015; Ruckenstein and Dow Schüll, 2017; Petersen, 2019) and its implementation in the field of global health. While AI-CAD embodies global health attraction for technical solutions to end TB, this research allows questioning a new field of practice at the crossroads of global health and artificial intelligence (Schwable and Wahl, 2020), which remains a challenge both from the point of view of regulation and analysis. Finally, AI-CAD can be considered a moving health technology, regularly updated, which reconfigure global health assemblage (Brown et al., 2012) requiring and redefining different actors and institutions. As such, the analysis of such objects requires social theories to describe the networks in which they are inserted, as much as they allow questioning the social theories used to examine the dimensions of such technologies and their health and social effects (Fejerskov, 2017).

AI-CAD software programs to detect tuberculosis-compatible abnormalities on chest x-rays have been in development since the early 2000s (van Ginneken et al., 2002). Since 2014, the terms “machine learning” or “multiple-instance learning” have sprung up in scientific publications aiming to evaluate such software (Melendez et al., 2014). In more recent years, rapid advances in deep learning AI-methods in the field of image recognition have led to radiological image analysis emerging as the most advanced medical application of AI. A number of AI-CAD competitors have entered the market, pressing international health organizations to take a position. Positive evaluations of the performance of AI-CAD for TB detection (Qin et al., 2021; Kik et al., 2022) have resulted in WHO endorsement (World Health Organization, 2021a).

In recent years, many projects have been set up to test AI-CAD involving diverse global health actors, from funders (such as USAID, Global Fund) and innovation supporters (FIND initially the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, now defined as the global Alliance for Diagnostics, (FIND, 2023)), to implementers (such as NGOs and tuberculosis national programs) and advocates (such as the Stop TB Partnership), and research and academic centers. These partnerships are indicative of a shift in strategy to ramp up active case finding and TB detection, wherein new entities and the tools themselves (e.g., GeneXpert) contribute partnership development (Macdonald and Harper, 2019). There have been a flourishing number of pilot projects involving CAD developers, with effectiveness and accuracy studies involving academic, technical and advocacy institutions in the North. There has also been a call for regulation from global health institutions, notably the WHO, to issue recommendations for AI-CAD use (Qin et al., 2021) and for global procurement agencies to integrate AI-CAD into their catalogues, hence formalizing a need and market demand for AI-CAD.

This begs the question: what political and epistemological conceptions might be embedded in AI-CAD, including its development and regulation? What views of global and public health are embodied in such devices that seek to overcome the paucity of diagnostic health professionals by automating a diagnostic process? To answer this, we must describe the “AI-CAD social and material world,” which we define as the assemblage built from the interactions between global health actors who develop, frame, regulate, and use these technologies (Ong and Collier, 2005). Identifying this network of actors and relations can help us to grasp how institutions frame AI-CAD, and how this new detection technology, in turn, contributes to their positions and missions in global health, just as other technologies have in the past such as ARVs in the HIV context (Packard, 2016) or other rapid diagnostics in the Ebola context (Kelly et al., 2022). In routine use, AI-CAD still needs integration with health program infrastructure such as hospitals, national TB programs or other administrative and organizational entities, what Engel has called a “diagnostic ecosystem” (Engel, 2020). The theoretical notion of an assemblage may allow us to describe this global ecosystem without succumbing to the pitfalls of technical determinism or linear visions of technology. STS studies point to the influence of resources and relationships in shaping diagnosis and detection procedures in the field, and how these may impose parallel effects that have an implication on health inequalities and related equity issues.

